# BHPropagation
Python scripts for Brownian-Huygens Propagation

# Copyright 2026 Hrvoje J Hrgov\v{c}i\'c

# Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

# THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.



Define generic graph with continuous, integer (and also token) amplitudes. See paper for clarification.

All numeric data and graphs can be generated by way of this program or minor variations thereof.

Note that in this program we use Amplitude to define the count at a given arc of a node. In the paper we reserve amplitude for the sum of the particle counts at all the arcs leading into (or out of) a node.

Also note that the graphs here may be randomly generated to satisfy some basic properties about their respective
connection matrices and their average number of neighbors and so forth. They will be suitable for
generating waves only if their random walk distributions are Gaussian (with the same k). 
So while the D-dimensional rectangular lattices satisfy that criterion (if they're large enough for 
particle densities to be quasi-continuous) the other graphs might not even have a well-defined Euclidean dimension. 
Even so, we can still generate random walks and Brownian-Huygens propagation (and variations thereof) on their 
nodes, and see how the overall particle number grows with time.

At any point, any generated graph, call it Xgraph, can be saved to some pickle file named "Xpickle.pkl" by invoking the command SaveGraph(Xgraph, "Xpickle.pkl"), and then analyzed at some later point for its connection matrix, particle distribution, etc.

The code here allows for a given imput configuration to be generated many times (as for a Monte Carlo simulation)
in order to verify that the expected number of particles matches the continuous case (or the ModPool case -- again,
see the paper for clarification) for a high enough number of runs.

In the special case of a 2-d graph of length 4 in either dimension we can use
the --print option to generate helpful 4x4 diagrams of the evolution of the graph. This has proved very useful for debugging.

With minor modification, one can use this approach to observe any 4-by-4 quadrant of a graph (or a 2-D 4x4 slice of
some larger graph). Also, various  modules beginning with "Export" are used to obtain matrix representations of
2-D graphs, which also proved to be very handy. Testing any set of dynamics was done by way  of integrating the squared error w.r.t. the continuous (floating-point) case corresponding to any initial configuration and number of time steps. (This is is refered to as chi-squared in the code.)

The  ModPool version was also computed along with any regularized attempt, so that the convergence  of the Fermi/Bose dynamics can be compared to the
more straightforward ModPool version.

Note that a primary workhorse routine, used in locating pairs of offsettable particle counts among the input or output arcs at a given node, is "FillIn" or "NetOut". These are used to annihilate the particles (or antiparticles) in a given vector of particle counts without otherwise shuffling or mixing or pooling particles in any way. There were several different variations of this routine, and all seemed to work fine, though one may be more efficient with regard to how a model converges to the correct wave solution.

Here is a sample script for observing chi-squared error inside ipython (replace "%run" with "python" if ipython is not available):

    %run  ./BHPropagation.py --dim 2 --length 8 --steps 4 --dynamics bosevary  --seed 579289 --runs 800  --boundaryconditions Initialize1off

Note there is an ExportDimGraph() function that puts amplitudes (or z-token amplitudes or ModPool-control-amplitudes) into a matrix for easier analysis.
In particular execute the folliwng to inspect the "correct" wave values (based on floating-point iteration of the discrete wave equation),
the observed particle-count approximation (i.e. Monte Carlo estimate), and the corresponding approximation one gets by way of ModPool dynamics:

    sumamparraycont
    np.round(np.sum((sumampallctl/float(NRuns))[:,:,:],2),3)
    np.round(np.sum((sumampall/float(NRuns))[:,:,:],2),3)


The graph in this question is a 2-dimensional lattice (of length 8, so 8 x 8 nodes in all). The initial conditions are "Initialize1off" which can be seen to correspond to a hodotic solution (see the paper) centered at the middle of the graphs. The run count is 800, so the routine generates 800 Monte Carlo runs, and each time exports the amplitudes of a graph into a matrix (this is done automatically for 2-d graphs) and the count after 4 steps is incremented.

The continuous case is also computed, as is the modpool, so that after the requisite number of steps the sumsquared error (or chi-sq) at each node.

A second mode of usage is to set the number of MonteCarlo runs to 1, and iterate the graph over many time steps and
observe the growth in the absolute number of particles, which is linear with time in the case of pure Brownian-Huygens Propagation, proportional to the square root of time in the case of ModPool (or its variations, as discussed in the paper), or else, bounded (barring the usual momentary spikes that can be brushed off as another quantum fluctuation). Search on linregress(tarr, absarr) in the code to see how this was done.

    %run ./BHPropagation.py --dim 2 --length 8 --steps 1000 --dynamics modpool  --seed 579289 --runs 1 --limit 1

Then, execute the following commands to plot N_abs with time:

    plt.plot(tarr, absarr)
    plt.show()

(If the dynamics involves Z-tokens, You can also substitute 'absarr' with 'absarrz' to 
plot the total number of Z-tokens instead).

You can also calculate the growth by way of a log-log plot:

    linregress(np.log(np.array(tarr)+1.0), np.log(absarr))

Next, inspect the step-by-step evolution of a small 2-d 4x4 lattice by way of the --print option:


    %run ./BHPropagation.py --dim 2 --length 4 --steps 1000 --dynamics bounded  --seed 579289 --runs 1 --limit 1 --print

As can be seen, the output shows the evolution of the regular particles, the Z-tokens, and also the ModPool "control" matrix.

All this can be easily modified.

The "bounded" dynamics (once mistakenly refer to whorl-regularized dynamics (by way of Z-tokens), and the associated threshold value M (specified by the --limit option) which dictates the threshold such that any time the particle count exceeds it, whorls are emitted. So, if --dynamics is 'bounded' and the --limit option is 1, the result is the Fermi case. There is also an explicit 'fermi' dynamics, which is from an early version. It can be ignored -- the primary difference is that the fermi option uses an old "NetOut" routine (see above), but is otherwise equivalent.
